---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Horizon 2: query aggregation, Auth0 integration, WebSockets"
author: Ryan Paul
author_twitter: segphault
permalink: blog/horizon-2/
hero_image: 2016-08-25/horizon-2-banner.png
---

Today we're pleased to announce the official release of Horizon 2.0, codenamed
Whitney. You can [install it today][install] from npm.

Horizon 2.0 introduces a powerful new query aggregation feature, support for the
Auth0 cloud service, several noteworthy architectural changes, and many bug
fixes. The release represents the first round of improvements that we've
implemented in collaboration with our user community since Horizon's launch in
May.

# Aggregation queries

Query aggregation is the most significant new feature in version 2.0. The new
`aggregate` and `model` functions provide a way to combine multiple Horizon
queries, making it easy to track their collective output:

```javascript
let horizon = Horizon()
let aggregated = horizon.aggregate({
  owner: horizon("people").find("bob"),
  pet: horizon("animals").find("spot"),
  related: {
    friends: horizon("people").findAll({friendOf: "bob"}).limit(10),
    petFriends: horizon("animals").findAll({friendOf: "spot"}).limit(10)
  },
  someConstant: "Always have this here",
})
```

You can invoke the `aggregate` function on a `Horizon` instance. Its parameter
is an object that associates named properties with Horizon queries or other
compatible values. You can chain a `fetch` or `watch` operation to the end of an
aggregation, allowing you to either retrieve the values once or track the
changes on an ongoing basis. When you `watch` an aggregation, it will emit
updates any time one of the aggregated sub-queries has new results.

In addition to Horizon queries, aggregations can also include literal values,
Observables, Promises, and arrays or objects that contain any of those supported
values. Aggregations are powerful tools for composing multi-faceted queries.

You can also take advantage of various RxJS features to use Horizon aggregations
for query orchestration and flow control. For example, the following code
demonstrates how to use an Observable timer alongside a query in an aggregation
to force the output to emit on the timed interval in addition to when the query
receives an update:

```javascript
horizon.aggregate({
  counter: Observable.timer(0, 1000),
  someQuery: hz("foo").find("bar"),
}).watch().subscribe({ next(x){ console.log(x) }})
```

The `model` function is a convenience method that provides a shorthand for
parameterizing aggregates, wrapping them in a callable function that lets you
pass in arguments:

```javascript
let myModel = horizon.model((a, b, c) => ({
  foo: hz("foo").find(a),
  bar: hz("bar").find(b),
  baz: hz("baz").find(c)
});

var modelA = myModel(1, 2, 3);
var modelB = myModel(2, 3, 4);
```

You can optionally nest your models, which is often useful when you want to
compose complex operations from smaller, reusable parts. For more details and
more comprehensive examples, refer to the [official documentation][aggdocs].

# Auth0 integration

Auth0 is a popular identity management and single sign-on service. It's
available as an on-premise or hosted cloud platform that can handle
authentication and user management for applications, with optional support for a
selection of third-party OAuth providers.

You can use Auth0 with Horizon to enable conventional username/password
authentication or to take advantage of their broader range of OAuth provider
integrations. Horizon's Auth0 support was [contributed][601] by community member
[Anton Poznyakovskiy][ghanton].

# Native WebSockets

We made some important changes to Horizon's underlying network plumbing in
version 2.0. The new version uses plain WebSockets for realtime messaging
instead of [engine.io][]. Given the ubiquity of native WebSocket support in
browsers and other environments, many of you have indicated that you prefer the
simplicity of a straightforward WebSocket-based protocol over the flexibility of
engine.io's transport-neutral abstraction layer.

Using vanilla WebSockets instead of engine.io simplifies some high-scalability
deployment scenarios, particularly in cases where reverse proxies are involved.
With the transition away from engine.io, Horizon no longer provides a built-in
long-polling fallback. We are still evaluating possible avenues for making
Horizon's network transport layer extensible in the future.

# Simplifying interoperability with RethinkDB

Horizon 2.0 includes a number of improvements that reduce friction for
developers who want to build Horizon applications that interoperate with other
RethinkDB applications or microservices.

When the Horizon backend creates the underlying RethinkDB table for a
collection, the table and collection name [are now consistent][685]- -there's no
longer a random hash at the end of the table name. You can also insert data into
the Horizon tables [without manually adding a version field][614].

# Horizon Roadmap

Horizon is still under heavy active development. In response to user feedback
and lessons we learned from building our own applications with Horizon, we're
revisiting many of our early architectural decisions. You can expect to see a
fair amount of churn in the coming months as we continue to overhaul key parts
of the Horizon stack. Some of the coming changes may be disruptive, but they
will result in a better developer experience as Horizon matures and becomes more
suitable for adoption in production environments.

The 2.0 release addresses many of the most pressing concerns raised by Horizon
early adopters. Our next big project is the design and implementation of a
plugin system. Plugins will give users the ability to extend Horizon with
additional features and capabilities. Additionally, the plugin system will make
it easier for us to incorporate large features--like support for REST endpoints
and adding custom Horizon commands--with less disruption to Horizon's core.

We're also exploring ways to make Horizon integrate more seamlessly with the
rest of the Node.js ecosystem. In the long term, we aim to make Horizon more
modular and easier to embed, while simultaneously taking better advantage of
existing Node.js server and middleware frameworks. Those changes will have
significant implications for how Horizon and applications that embed Horizon
will handle authentication and other major parts of the developer experience.

We conduct all ongoing Horizon development in the open, with the direct
involvement of our community. You can participate in the process and help shape
the future of the Horizon stack. To learn more about our nascent plans for
Horizon's plugin system, you can follow the [discussion on GitHub][pull588].

# Conclusion 

To see all of the features and improvements that we incorporated into the
Horizon 2.0 release, check out the [release milestone][milestone] in our issue
tracker on GitHub. For details about migrating your Horizon project from 1.x to
2.x, please refer to the compatibility notes in the
[Horizon 2.0 discussion thread][discuss]. The Horizon command line tool includes
a new `hz migrate` command to help you seamlessly transition your project to new
versions of Horizon.

We're especially grateful to the users who contributed to this release by
providing feedback, feature recommendations, bug reports, and pull requests.
Thank you for your support!

[engine.io]: https://github.com/socketio/engine.io
[socket.io]: http://socket.io
[ghanton]: https://github.com/poznyakovskiy
[601]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/horizon/pull/601
[685]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/horizon/pull/685
[614]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/horizon/pull/614
[milestone]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/horizon/milestone/7?closed=1
[pull588]: https://github.com/rethinkdb/horizon/pull/588
[discuss]: https://discuss.horizon.io/t/horizon-v2-0-0-beta/433
[install]: /install/
[aggdocs]: /api/horizon/#aggregate
